Pancreatic Cancer Predictor

Pancreatic cancer is ranked among the most deadliest cancers due to its low 5-year-survival rate and difficulty in successful diagnosis in its early stages in lack of direct characteristic biomarkers. However, methods based on machine learning provide potential means to identify pancreatic cancer using urinary biomarkers. The objective of this capstone project aims to compare multiple classifier models and determine an optimal model to predict whether patients with unseen urinary biomarkers have pancreatic cancer. Being able to correctly detect pancreatic cancer in early stage promises a new approach in clinical diagnosis, which will certainly assist doctors to produce more accurate results.

The dataset used in this project is provided by Crnogorac-Jurcevic et al. in their publication "A combination of urinary biomarker panel and PancRISK score for earlier detection of pancreatic cancer: A case–control study" [1] The target variable to be classified is "diagnosis" column, with expected values of 1 (healthy), 2 (benign hepatobiliary disease) and 3(pancreatic cancer). Feature variables are chosen to be urinary biomarkers, i.e. plasma_CA19_9, creatinine, LYVE1, REG1B, TFF1, REG1A and patients' age and sex. The rest of the columns, for instance, sample_origin (hospitals at which tests were performed) and stage (pancreatic cancer stage if tested positive) are considered irrelavent to the interest of this project and are therefore disregarded.

Since the target variable (diagnosis) takes on 3 possible values, four multi classifier models covered in Supervised Learning Module will be performed in parallel for peer comparison and they are: logistic regression, random forest , K-nearest neighbor and SVM.

Disclaimer: Machine learning models with identical objective are trained by the authors from which the aforementioned dataset is taken (see reference), but the following works by Linmin Wang, the student, are by no mean a reconstruction of their prior works. In fact, the models and clinical interpretations of variables elaborated in this paper lay far beyond the student's comprehension and only the dataset was taken from this publication.

Reference: [1] A combination of urinary biomarker panel and PancRISK score for earlier detection of pancreatic cancer: A case–control study Debernardi S, O’Brien H, Algahmdi AS, Malats N, Stewart GD, et al. (2020) A combination of urinary biomarker panel and PancRISK score for earlier detection of pancreatic cancer: A case–control study. PLOS Medicine 17(12): e1003489. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1003489
